QUESTIONS -

1. What is a NumPy array? Explain the advantages of NumPy arrays over Python lists in terms of memory usage, performance and mathematical operations.
2. Describe the structure of a Pandas DataFrame. How is a DataFrame different from a NumPy array and What are its main components?
3. What is filtering in Pandas? Explain how filtering is used to extract specific rows from a DataFrame based on one or more conditions.
4. What is sorting in a DataFrame? Discuss the difference between sorting data by a single column and sorting by multiple columns. Why is sorting important in data analysis?
5. What is data cleaning and Why is it necessary? Explain the common issues found in raw datasets and how data cleaning improves data quality.
6. How can missing values affect data analysis? Discuss different methods used in Pandas to handle missing values, including removing and replacing them.
7. Explain the importance of duplicate data detection and removal. How do duplicate records impact data analysis, and what techniques can be used to identify and remove them in Pandas?

ANSWERS :
1. What is a NumPy array? Explain the advantages of NumPy arrays over Python lists in terms of memory usage, performance and mathematical operations.

A NumPy array is a powerful data structure provided by the Python library NumPy used for storing and manipulating large amounts of numerical data efficiently. It stores elements of the same data type in a multidimensional structure such as 1D, 2D, or 3D arrays.

Advantages of NumPy Arrays over Python Lists: 

1. Memory Efficiency
NumPy arrays consume less memory compared to Python lists.
Lists store references to objects, while NumPy arrays store data in contiguous memory locations.
This reduces memory overhead and improves efficiency.

2. Faster Performance
NumPy arrays are optimized using low-level implementations written in C.
Mathematical and looping operations execute much faster than normal Python lists.
Suitable for large datasets and scientific computing.

3. Mathematical Operations
NumPy supports vectorized operations.
Mathematical calculations can be performed directly on arrays without using loops.

Example:
import numpy as np
a = np.array([1, 2, 3])
print(a + 2)

Output:
[3 4 5]

4. Multidimensional Support
Supports matrices and multidimensional arrays.
Useful in machine learning, image processing, and data analysis.



2. Describe the structure of a Pandas DataFrame. How is a DataFrame different from a NumPy array and what are its main components?

A DataFrame is a two-dimensional labeled data structure provided by Pandas. It organizes data in rows and columns similar to an Excel table or database table.

Main Components of a DataFrame -
Rows → Represent records or observations.
Columns → Represent variables or attributes.
Index → Unique labels assigned to rows.
Data Values → Actual information stored inside the table.

Example:

import pandas as pd
data = {
    "Name": ["Ram", "Sam"],
    "Age": [20, 22]
}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
print(df)

Difference Between DataFrame and NumPy Array

Feature	    Pandas DataFrame	                NumPy Array

Data Type	  Can store different data types	  Stores same data type
Labels	    Has row and column labels	        No labels
Structure	  Tabular	                          Matrix-like
Usage	      Data analysis and handling	      Numerical computation

Importance of DataFrames -
-Easy data manipulation.
-Supports filtering, sorting, grouping, and cleaning.
-Widely used in data science and analytics.



3. What is filtering in Pandas? Explain how filtering is used to extract specific rows from a DataFrame based on one or more conditions.

Filtering in Pandas means selecting specific rows from a DataFrame that satisfy certain conditions. It helps users extract only the required data for analysis.

Why Filtering is Important
-Removes unwanted records.
-Focuses only on relevant information.
-Simplifies analysis and reporting.

Filtering Using One Condition -

Example:
import pandas as pd
df = pd.DataFrame({
    "Name": ["A", "B", "C"],
    "Marks": [80, 45, 90]
})
print(df[df["Marks"] > 50])

This displays students with marks greater than 50.

Filtering Using Multiple Conditions

Example:
print(df[(df["Marks"] > 50) & (df["Marks"] < 90)])

Common Operators Used -
> Greater than
< Less than
== Equal to
& AND condition
| OR condition

Filtering is commonly used in real-world applications such as student result analysis, sales reports, and customer data analysis.



4. What is sorting in a DataFrame? Discuss the difference between sorting data by a single column and sorting by multiple columns. Why is sorting important in data analysis?

Sorting in a DataFrame means arranging data in ascending or descending order based on column values. In Pandas, sorting is performed using the sort_values() function.

Sorting by a Single Column -
Example:
df.sort_values(by="Marks")
This sorts the DataFrame using only the Marks column.

Sorting by Multiple Columns -
Example:
df.sort_values(by=["Marks", "Age"])
This first sorts by Marks and then sorts rows with equal marks using Age.

Difference Between Single and Multiple Column Sorting -

Single Column Sorting	          Multiple Column Sorting
Uses one column only	          Uses more than one column
Simpler sorting	                More detailed sorting
Faster for small tasks	        Better for complex datasets

Importance of Sorting -
-Makes data easier to understand.
-Helps identify highest and lowest values.
-Improves reporting and visualization.
-Useful in ranking and comparison tasks.

Example applications:
-Sorting students by marks.
-Sorting products by price.
-Sorting employees by salary and experience.



5. What is data cleaning and why is it necessary? Explain the common issues found in raw datasets and how data cleaning improves data quality.

Data cleaning is the process of detecting, correcting or removing incorrect, incomplete, duplicate or irrelevant data from a dataset. It is an important step before performing data analysis.

Why Data Cleaning is Necessary -
-Improves accuracy of analysis.
-Prevents incorrect results.
-Enhances reliability of datasets.
-Increases overall data quality.

Common Issues in Raw Data -
Missing values
Duplicate records
Incorrect formats
Typographical errors
Inconsistent values
Outliers and invalid entries

How Data Cleaning Improves Data Quality -
*Removes errors and inconsistencies.
*Makes data standardized and organized.
*Improves machine learning model performance.
*Produces accurate reports and predictions.\

Common Data Cleaning Techniques -
*Removing duplicates
*Filling missing values
*Correcting data formats
*Replacing incorrect values
*Standardizing text data

Data cleaning is widely used in business analytics, healthcare systems, banking and research projects.



6. How can missing values affect data analysis? Discuss different methods used in Pandas to handle missing values, including removing and replacing them.

Missing values occur when some data entries are empty or unavailable in a dataset. In Pandas, missing values are usually represented as NaN.

Effects of Missing Values -
*Reduces accuracy of analysis.
*Produces misleading results.
*Causes errors in machine learning algorithms.
*Affects statistical calculations.

Methods to Handle Missing Values in Pandas
1. Detecting Missing Values
df.isnull()

2. Removing Missing Values
Using dropna():
df.dropna()
Removes rows containing missing values.

3. Replacing Missing Values
Using fillna():
df.fillna(0)
Replaces missing values with 0.

4. Replacing with Mean or Median
df["Marks"].fillna(df["Marks"].mean())
Useful for numerical datasets 

Importance of Handling Missing Values -
Improves dataset completeness.
Helps generate accurate predictions.
Ensures better decision-making.



7. Explain the importance of duplicate data detection and removal. How do duplicate records impact data analysis, and what techniques can be used to identify and remove them in Pandas?

Duplicate data means repeated records appearing multiple times in a dataset. Detecting and removing duplicates is important for maintaining data accuracy and consistency.

Impact of Duplicate Records -
*Produces incorrect analysis results.
*Increases dataset size unnecessarily.
*Misleads statistical calculations.
*Affects machine learning model performance.

Example:
Duplicate customer records may lead to incorrect sales reports.
Detecting Duplicate Records in Pandas

Using duplicated():
df.duplicated()
Returns True for duplicate rows.

Removing Duplicate Records :
Using drop_duplicates():
df.drop_duplicates()
Removes repeated rows from the dataset.

Benefits of Removing Duplicates -
-Improves data quality.
-Reduces storage space.
-Enhances accuracy of reports.
-Makes datasets cleaner and more reliable.